---
layout: post
title: Miami University Basketball Lineup Optimization
---
Trent Irwin, Braxton Flaker, Oliver Stern, Nick Berry, Will Stansifer, Lauren Skelly, Eoin Young, Alex Ball

[View repository](https://github.com/lrskelly/miami-basketball) on GitHub

## Executive Summary

This project provides strategic insight into optimal player lineup configurations for the Miami University Men’s Basketball team using player archetype analysis. By clustering MAC player statistics from the 2014–15 season onward, five archetypes were identified: Bench 3&D Guard, Interior Role Big, Versatile Scoring Forward, Off-Ball Shooting Guard, and Two-Way Lead Guard. These archetypes were used to assess historical lineup trends and their relationships with team performance. The results highlight patterns in archetype usage and suggest targeted strategies for both recruiting and lineup optimization. 

A general trend of an increasing number of Off-Ball Shooting Guards and a reduction in Interior Role Bigs was found, something quite consistent with the evolving trend surrounding the popularity of the three-point shot. Analyzing key team statistics for the top three regular-season teams from the MAC during that period also turned out to be fruitful. Teams with the highest winning percentages tend to have the most Off-Ball Shooting Guards in general and the least Interior Role Bigs. Furthermore, the higher the winning percentage of a team, the more Two-Way Lead Guards those teams tend to have. For offensive rating, it was uncovered that there is a sharp decline in the number of Bench 3&D Guards for the teams with the highest offensive ratings. Finally, the teams with the best defensive ratings seem to have significantly more Off-Ball Shooting Guards than those with lower defensive ratings. 

Looking into how the Miami University Men’s Basketball Team since Coach Travis Steele took over in the 2022-23 season, we observed that a sharp decline in the number of Off-Ball Shooting Guards and a sharp incline in the number of Two-Way Lead Guards rostered over the course of the last season has coincided with the massive improvement in the program’s winning percentage over the last season.


## Introduction

The purpose of this project is to provide meaningful insights about the most optimal lineup configurations by player ‘archetype’ to the Miami University Men’s Basketball team coaching staff so that they can make more informed recruiting decisions, both for high school recruits and potential targets in the transfer portal. The research is also looking to figure out ways to allow for a better understanding of how to improve game strategy moving forward. In an era of basketball increasingly shaped by three-point shooting, positionless play, and advanced analytics, understanding the makeup of effective lineups has never been more important. Yet, coaches often rely on traditional positional labels rather than data-driven archetypes that better reflect how players actually contribute on the court. Through the use of a cluster analysis of historical and current data pertaining to regular season individual player statistics for MAC players dating back to the 2014-15 season, identifiable player archetypes were identified that each player during this period fit into. Those player archetypes identified in the analysis were then named based on mean statistics for each cluster. These archetypes are Bench 3&D Guard, Interior Role Big, Versatile Scoring Forward, Off-Ball Shooting Guard, and Two-Way Lead Guard. Further analysis on how the Miami University Men’s Basketball team was then performed in order to determine the tendencies of the coaching staff when it comes to lineup strategies and the quality of those decisions based on their regular season success over a certain period of time.

This research will also go into an in-depth analysis of how other MAC teams structure their lineups and how each team excels based on the distribution and utilization of different player archetypes. By comparing Miami Men’s Basketball to other schools in the MAC, the study aims to identify the best lineup construction for each opponent and situation. Each player archetype will be selected based on statistical metrics, physical characteristics, and play style. These metrics include offensive and defensive efficiency, usage, shooting statistics, and win percentage. For example, a Versatile Scoring Forward will likely play the majority of the game on both ends of the floor in comparison to a Bench 3&D Guard who has limited minutes to make an impact. In addition, this study will use visualizations and statistical models to map out lineup configurations and illustrate the best archetype fit. The data will be used to examine which archetypes are most successful with certain teammates in various situations. The goal of our study is to present our findings to Miami Men's Head Basketball Coach Travis Steele and his staff, with the aim of helping the team evaluate lineup performance from the past season and develop more informed strategies for future success.

Ultimately, the integration of performance data into today’s sports landscape has opened the door for basketball leadership to view the game through a different lens. By shifting focus to player archetypes over typical positions, decision makers can find the best lineup fit for success. Whether influencing recruitment strategies or optimizing game strategy, our data-driven approach hopes to provide the Miami coaching staff with clear insights on the most effective practices.

## Methods

#### Shot Type Analysis
Firstly, an initial exploratory analysis was conducted into the overall shot distribution of the MAC conference over the past decade. By doing so, it would give some insight into the overall playstyle of the MAC, something that will likely influence the archetypes of players the teams are pursuing. This would also provide a snapshot into whether the MAC should be the only conference analyzed, or whether play style is consistent enough throughout the whole of college basketball, where it may be more robust to do a full scale analysis. To do so, player data was gathered that was differentiated based on the type of shots being attempted. The categories of shot type are as follows: three-point, mid-range (from seventeen feet until the three point line), short range (less than seventeen feet but outside the restricted area), and at the rim. This data came from access to the Synergy database, from which each separate season was downloaded for each different shot type, aggregated together for all ten seasons, and separated by shot type. Then the MAC only teams were separated out and compared with the summary statistics of the various shot types to the entire NCAA over the same period of time. The data was divided to a specific team level to examine if there were any correlations between certain teams favoring a specific shot type over another and that team’s winning percentage. To see these relationships, graphs of each team’s shot tendencies over the ten-season period were created and compared to the MAC average. There were also a number of different linear regression models run to see if shot distribution had a statistically significant impact on the variance of a team’s winning percentage. 

#### Cluster Analysis
 Compiling our research for this project was a multi-step process that began with analyzing historical and current MAC basketball data that we obtained from the database, Synergy. Utilizing our unique access to NCAA men’s basketball data, we pulled a variety of offensive and defensive metrics that we determined to be important in player evaluation. The dataset spans back 10 years, containing individual player statistics for every season except for 2020-2021, which was highly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. While the teams did end up playing most of their games, there were many cases during that season where key players or sometimes entire teams would have to sit out for a large period of time due to someone contracting the disease, which would have impacted the data both in terms of the summary and in terms of any time-series analysis that may be performed. The data was also limited to only regular season games, as not every team plays the same number of conference tournament or national tournament games in addition to their regular season. There were a few statistics, primarily defensively focused, that would be useful for the clustering analysis that were not included in the Synergy database. To solve this issue, data from Sports Reference College Basketball (SRCBB) was also introduced.
Next, we cleaned the data, removing any unnecessary metrics, fixed missing values, and filtered certain variables. When looking at player data, it was decided to filter out any players who averaged less than 10 minutes per game or appeared in less than 10 games, as these players act as noise that would likely not provide meaningful insights for the analysis. This record reduction decision resulted in a drop in total records used in the analysis from just over 1400 to just over 1000, which was still an acceptable number of records for this analysis. In merging the Synergy dataset with the Sports Reference College Basketball dataset, there were a lot of issues with the naming conventions for players and teams. Some naming conventions were simple to fix, where suffixes like ‘jr.’ or ‘III’ needed to be accounted for, but some required manual intervention, where all the non-matching names in the set that were left after our filtering were found manually and made to match properly. The final step taken before clustering was to normalize some of the continuous numeric statistics, as was performed by Diambra in his report, which was done for PTS, TRB, AST, Tov, STL, and BLK.

Following data cleaning/wrangling, a cluster analysis was performed with the aim of grouping individuals based on play style. The k-means cluster analysis used FG%, 3P%, FT%, PtsPerMin, TRBPerMin, ASTPerMin, TovPerMin, STLPerMin, BLKPerMin, and Opp FG% within the model. To select the optimal number of clusters for our study, we used several different methods to try to determine the optimal number of clusters that would result in the best cluster analysis that balanced the need to have the least overlap with the need to have the most individuality. The results of the Elbow Method, which identifies the point where adding more clusters no longer significantly decreases the Within-Cluster Sum of Squares, were inconclusive, as arguments could be made for selecting 3, 5, or 8 clusters. One can observe that there are slight elbows at those points, but there are no clear-cut points where one is better than the other, which resulted in all three points being considered as potential optimal numbers of clusters. 

Next,  the Silhouette Method measures how well a data point fits within its cluster compared to other clusters, measuring whether the player is an excellent example of its own cluster or just a bad example of the nearest neighboring cluster. A higher Silhouette score indicates that there is better clustering. After running this test, the optimal number of clusters the model came up with was 2, though given the context of the research, 2 clusters was not practical, as there need to be at least five players on the floor at one time and it does not make sense for a team to consist of six primary ball handlers and three post-up bigs. 

Lastly, the Gap Statistic was used, which compares how much the data within each cluster varies for different numbers of clusters and looks at how tightly packed the real clusters are compared to clusters created from randomly distributed data. This method found that five would be the optimal number of clusters, as that is the beginning of the peak in the gap statistic. Considering the output of all three methods, five clusters was decided as the optimal number of clusters to be used in this analysis, as that figure was agreed upon by both the Elbow Method and Gap Statistic, and is still has a generally high silhouette score relative to other cluster numbers. Although this figure may slightly underestimate the total number of roles typically found on a team, it captures a full lineup and provides a sufficiently realistic framework for the purposes of this analysis.

Once this was in place, the model was run and the results interpreted. Each cluster was assigned an archetype based on trends that we identified in the data, which was then used to identify players that fit each archetype, both from Miami University and the MAC as a whole. This step helped us go from an observational study to conclusions that can help coaches and team leadership with who to keep on the roster for next season and players to target in the transfer portal.

## Results and Discussion


#### Shot Type Analysis

Our analysis of MAC shot type distribution had some interesting results: we found that there was a clear delineation of play style from the MAC and the rest of the NCAA, but our models did not seem to show shot type distribution as being significant in explaining the variation of win percentage.

In the 2014-2015 season, the first season in our data, there were only two MAC teams with a three-point rate below the NCAA average three-point rate of 34.2%. There were also only two MAC teams with an at the rim rate below the NCAA average of 37.2%. Over the course of the entire time frame, there was never a single season where any MAC team had a combined three-point and at the rim rates below 75%; meaning at least 75% of all shots for all MAC teams over the past ten seasons came from beyond the three-point line or at the rim. These results led us to believe that there is a specific offensive philosophy and play style for MAC teams; one that revolves heavily around shots from three-point range and shots at the rim, the two most efficient shots in basketball. Our group’s theory as to why this is the case is that since the MAC is a smaller, mid-major conference, which does not bring in the same caliber of player as the top schools in the nation, they have to rely more heavily on strategy and game planning.

The results of our attempts to fit a linear regression model for win percentage did not show that shot types have a significant impact on win percentage. The first model we tried used the variables for all the rates of each shot type, both offensively and defensively, as well as the offensive and defensive field goal percentages for each shot type. We tried to remove interaction terms to improve the modeling, but never reached an adjusted R2 above 0.4236, and that was in a model with many variables and only a handful of them having a p-value under 0.05. Although none of the models that we produced fit the data well enough to have explanatory or predictive value, the main point of the analysis on shot type was to establish the offensive style of the MAC. This will allow us to better apply our archetypes defined by our cluster analysis to the MAC as a whole and give more credence to the applicability of the results of our project. 

#### Cluster Analysis

The result of the cluster analysis shows that though the optimal number of clusters was chosen using the analytical methods mentioned previously, there is still quite a bit of overlap between the five clusters, each depicted in its own color. The clustering model was able to capture nearly half of the data variance, 48.2%, between its two principal dimensions depicted on the x and y axes. Another metric used to evaluate the quality of this analysis was the between-cluster sum of squares to total sum of squares ratio, which was 41.4%. This means that 41.4% of the total variance in the clusters could be explained by the cluster structure, which is generally not an extremely high value when it comes to cluster analysis. That said, sports data is notoriously difficult to make extremely accurate models with and the fact that no advanced statistics were used to build the model likely explains much of the variance not explained by this model. In any case, explaining nearly half of the variance for a project like this one is, while not spectacular, certainly not a bad figure and provides enough confidence for the project to move forward with this clustering analysis.

In order to identify the best way to name each cluster so that an average viewer of this analysis would better understand what types of players fit into each cluster, the mean statistics for each cluster were calculated, from which a broad view of each cluster was taken. Then, by taking statistically different statistics from each cluster and comparing them with those same statistics of other clusters, to ultimately better determine the roles each cluster plays and assign a name based on that role. 

#### Player Archetype Classification

Beginning with cluster 1, or cluster 0 according to Python’s indexing conventions, the immediately obvious standout in terms of per game average statistics was the massive difference in minutes played per game between it and the other four clusters. 

It was quite evident that cluster 1 is made up of players who tend to play much lower minutes and do not tend to start games. Looking further into the ball-based statistics, it is also apparent that these players are not high scorers, though when they do score, it is often from three, as they take nearly half of their field goal attempts from beyond the arc, a proportion quite high relative to the other clusters. One final defining characteristic of this cluster is that they seem to be high-quality defenders, allowing the lowest opponent field goal percentage and accruing the second-highest steals per minute figure. It is also important to note that this cluster is made up primarily of guards, 170, followed by forwards, 47, and then centers, 2. Therefore, given these observations, this cluster has been designated Bench 3&D Guard, to signify the lack of games started, three-point shooting tendencies, and defensive impact. An excellent example of a Bench 3&D Guard from last season was Marquis Barnett of Kent State. He only started 7 games this season, attempted just under half his shots from three point range, and has high-quality defensive statistics relative to the means for this cluster, at 0.06 steals per minute and a 0.353 opponent field goal percentage.

Moving on to cluster 2, it is obvious that this type of player tends to play around the rim by the statistics shown in Table 3. With the highest offensive rebound per game and blocks per game, combined with the fact that they only take 0.1 threes per game on average, means that they spend most of their time inside the arc and near the rim, taking highly efficient shots which contributes to their highest mean field goal percentage out of all clusters. Further compounding this understanding is the distribution of players in this cluster, where while the majority of the cluster are forwards, 70, there is by far the largest number of centers, 45, in this cluster, nearly 62% of total centers during this time period. Based of those facts, this cluster was identified as Interior Role Bigs, showing that they tend to play around the rim, perform that role well, and do not stretch the floor like many big men tend to do nowadays. A good example of a player from this cluster from this past season is Miami’s own Antwone Woolfolk. Listed as 6’9”, Woolfolk is one of the tallest players on the team and his statistics mirror those of an average Interior Role Big. He shot over 60% from the field, a mark significantly higher than the average, even for his highly efficient cluster. Furthermore, above average rebounding, 5.4 total rebounds per game, and blocking, 0.9 blocks per game, combined with his incredibly low average three-point field goals attempted, 0.4 per game, and made, 0.1 per game, show how he tends to play around the rim.

Cluster 3 is a much more ambiguous cluster, as these players tend to perform well in several areas that are not necessarily related. Table 4 demonstrates how they are decent scorers, ranking second in overall points per game and second in points per minute. Further illustrating their scoring prowess is the fact that they have the second-highest average field goal and three-point field goal percentages. As mentioned, though, they are big contributors in other areas, averaging the most total rebounds per game and the second most blocks per game, losing out by an extremely small margin. They are also solid on-ball defenders, with middle-of-the-road steals per game and opponent field goal percentage allowed. This cluster consists mostly of forwards, 148, by far the highest mark for any of the five clusters. Based on those observations, this cluster was named Versatile Scoring Forward, which represents both their ability to score and their contributions throughout the rest of the game. A player identified as a good representative of this cluster from last season is Jalin Billingsley from Eastern Michigan. He was a clear scorer, averaging 10.5 points per game, above average for all players and just above the average for his cluster. Additionally, he was efficient from both 2 and 3, with average field goal percentages of 60% and 36% respectively. Furthermore, Billingsley showed off his versatility by also being above average in total rebounds and blocks per game, though he sat slightly under the average for his cluster.

Cluster 4 was easily the largest cluster, representing 286 players when the next largest cluster, cluster 1, only represented 219. This cluster, as displayed in Table 5, can be characterized most as three-point shooters. They shoot far more threes per game, just over 4, far more efficiently, at 36%, than any other cluster. This combined with the fact that they actually shoot more threes than twos per game makes it clear that these are the three-point shooters. More than that, though, they tend to score the third most points in general, just lower than the Versatile Scoring Forwards. Beyond that, these players seem to function as secondary ball handlers, as their on-ball usage statistics, assists per game and steals per game, were the second best out of all clusters. Furthermore, this cluster is made up of the most guards in total and proportionately to their total count, at nearly 80% of the cluster. This cluster, as a result, was named Off-Ball Shooting Guard. A good example of a player from this cluster from the 2024/25 season is Ryan Sabol from Buffalo. He was a clear scorer, averaging 14.4 points per game, above average for all players and just above the average for his cluster. Though this figure is a bit high for this cluster, his lower average assists per game relative to another member of his team, Tyson Dunn, makes it clear to us that he was not the primary ball handler, allowing him to still be a decent example of his cluster. That said, Sabol's three-point field goal rate relative to his two-point field goal rate is what best solidifies him as an excellent representative of his cluster, where he attempted 3.3 more three-point field goal attempts than two-point field goal attempts on average last season.

The final cluster, cluster 5, is best characterized by their all-around prowess. These players appear to be the primary scorers on their teams, averaging the most points and field goals attempted per game. What seems to be the biggest aspect of this cluster is the high on-ball usage rate, which makes itself apparent in the statistics from Table 6, specifically the high average minutes per game, assists per game, and turnovers per game. Lastly, they also seem to be quality on-ball defenders, averaging the most steals per game and the second-lowest opponent field goal percentage allowed. By those observations, this cluster was given the label Two-Way Lead Guard, which sums up their ability to impact both sides of the ball as well as their extremely high usage rate relative to the other clusters. A good player to exemplify others from this cluster from last season is Chansey Willis of Western Michigan. He was a clear scorer, averaging 16.8 points per game, which was number one in the MAC last season. Additionally, his well above average turnovers, 3.3, and assists per game, 5.8, allude to his high on-ball usage. Lastly, his high steals per game, 1.7, display his defensive acumen, all of which make him an excellent example of a player from this cluster.


#### MAC and Miami Archetype Usage Analysis

Once all of the clusters were classified into more understandable player archetypes, the next step in the analysis was to try to better understand team configuration trends as they pertained to the number of players from each cluster who were on a team or in the conference in a given year. To begin, a time-series visualization was developed, Figure 7, that shows the total count of players from each cluster present in the MAC in each year. As is evident, there has been a significant increase in the popularity and usage of Off-Ball Shooting Guards during this period, reaching its peak in this most recent season. The other trend obvious during this period is the decrease in popularity of the Interior Role Big, which hit its lowest during this past season. While this would make a lot of sense based on the increase in popularity over the last fifteen years, with the cluster with the highest three-point shot rate becoming more popular and the cluster with the lowest three-point shot rate becoming less popular, our shot type analysis showed that there has not been a dramatic shift in overall three point shot rate across the MAC during this period, This is something to potentially look further into going forward.

Getting further into the impact of utilizing different cluster combinations on overall team performance, a new dataset was created, including team performance data from only the top three regular-season teams from each season. In doing so, an analysis of the decisions of only the highest quality teams could be performed, providing insights into how successful programs design their rosters. The first team performance statistic used to evaluate cluster selection was winning percentage. By graphing winning percentage against total number of players for each cluster, a clear picture emerged of not only what the winningest teams have been doing when they design their lineups, but also the impact of different numbers of players from each cluster on winning percentage. Before discussing the observations based on these figures, it’s important to note that Buffalo’s 2018–19 season was omitted as an outlier. With a winning percentage of 0.889—nearly 0.1 higher than any other team—it significantly skewed the lines of best fit. Additionally, it is clear that, in general, winning teams tend to have high numbers of Off-Ball Shooting Guards. It is also true that elite teams have fewer Bench 3&D Guards and more Two-Way Lead Guards. Next, both offensive, points scored per 100 possessions, and defensive, points given up per 100 possessions, ratings were graphed in much the same way to get a better idea of the best lineup configurations for coaches whose strategic tendencies might sway one way more than the other. For offensive rating, another outlier was identified and eliminated from the figure in Toledo from 2022/23, whose offensive efficiency was over 117, five points per 100 possessions higher than the next highest. Also, one can understand how the more offensively talented teams tend to have increasingly higher numbers of Off-Ball Shooting Guards and Versatile Shooting Forwards and significantly declining numbers of Bench 3&D Guards. On the other hand, it is also evident that there are more defensively talented teams that tend to have increasingly more Two-Way Lead Guards and Off-Ball Shooting Guards and declining numbers of Bench 3&D Guards, though not as significantly.

With the lineup configuration trends for the most successful MAC teams identified, the strategy of the Miami University Men’s Basketball program could finally be looked into further. Miami has a historically weak program over this period of time, only appearing once in the list of top three teams in the conference each year since the 2014/15 season. The best way to approach this analysis was to look specifically into the new coaching staff, as different coaches tend to have very different philosophies concerning how the best teams are made, a point made evident during the literature review section of this report. Therefore, the Miami University Men’s Basketball analysis began with the season that coach Travis Steele took the job, the 2022/23 season. Since then, Coach Steele has made spectacular strides in the program’s success, taking the team from a team that only won a third of their games to a team that came second in the conference last season, winning nearly eighty percent of the regular season games played. It shows the archetype distribution of his teams during that period. It seems that the team he inherited was full of primarily Off-Ball Shooting Guards, a figure that has shot down over the last three seasons from five to three. Coach Steele, it seems, believes that Two-Way Lead Guards are the way to go, and he has been quite correct. With the massive jump in players from that archetype also came the jump in winning percentage. Looking at last season’s roster, one can observe that three of the five starters, Peter Suder, Evan Ipsaro, and Mekhi Cooper, were players who fell into the Two-Way Lead Guard cluster. Given the team’s success with this kind of lineup configuration, the only recommendation that can be made is to keep doing what has been working and design the team in a similar way to last season, where there were plenty of Two-Way Lead Guards and an even dispersion of the remaining archetypes.


#### Recruitment

For our recruitment analysis, we looked at five incoming recruits joining the team at Miami next year. Through this analysis, we were able to provide a strategic outlook for the future of the basketball team using the clusters we created. The 2025 recruiting class consists of five players: Justin Kirby a 6'3 SG, Tyler Robbins a 6'10 PF/C, Trey Perry a 6'2 PG, Kyle Waltz a 6'7 SF/SG, and Leshawn Stowers a 6'5 SG/SF. Through our analysis, combined with the metrics and play styles of our incoming recruits, we were able to identify the following. Trey Perry and Kyle Waltz both fall into the Two-Way Lead Guard archetype. This is an important category as we have seen a trend in the elite teams having more two-way lead guards, and specifically, the defensively strong teams. We identified Justin Kirby and Leshawn Stowers as a part of the Off-Ball Shooting Guard archetype. This was another important classification, as the elite offensive teams in the MAC are prioritizing these off-ball shooting guards. The fifth player, Tyler Robbins, was classified as a Versatile Scoring Forward. This is another archetype that was found the more offensively strong teams prioritizing in their play styles. With this well-diversified group of archetypes, we think that the team is set up for another great year. The mix of archetypes complements each other very well in the grand scheme of MAC basketball.

## Limitations and Future Studies
	
In terms of limitations of this project, the only main thing is that the cluster analysis only explained around half of the variance of the cluster. Though this is certainly not a bad figure, a more complete understanding from a team experienced in cluster analysis could be beneficial in providing a more accurate cluster analysis. In the data gathering portion of the shot type analysis, we also found that there were some small rounding issues and that resulted in there being a couple of instances where the shot type rates for a team in a particular season could be slightly inflated, but we did not find it to be significant enough to change the conclusions we were able to draw from the data and analysis. One thing to potentially look into moving forward is why exactly the number of Off-Ball Shooting Guards has gone up when there has been no meaningful shift in the three-point shot rate in the MAC in general. It could also be potentially interesting to explore more regression modeling avenues, like predicting those key statistics based on how many of each archetype the team is made up of, therefore allowing coaches to see what types of players they might need to finalize their rosters



